{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Greek and Latin in Scientific Terminology, Lecture 1\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Andrew Dunning\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  11 September 2014\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Volunteer Opportunity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Be a note-taker\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The AccessAbility Resource Centre has requested a volunteer note-taker to take notes on behalf of students with a disability registered in this class and submit their notes online every week.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You get a certificate of recognition, a reference letter at the end of the year, and automatic sainthood.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Want to do it? Look at the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.utm.utoronto.ca/accessability/potential-notetakers"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
online flyer
}}}
, call 905-828-5422, email {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:accessvolunteers.utm@utoronto.ca"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
accessvolunteers.utm@utoronto.ca
}}}
, or drop by the Centre (Davis Building, room 2047).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Introduction\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 The idea of a scientific language\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Each part of the scientific community creates a language of its own, which makes it possible to hold productive discussions about the objects of their study.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Much as jargon is frequently abused, technical language is in many cases indispensable.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 What is science, anyway?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Latin {\i scientia,} root SCI-, from {\i scire,} \u8216'to know\u8217' ({\i sciens,} \u8216'knowing\u8217') + suffix -ia, ending for abstract nouns\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Why Greek and Latin?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab English, Latin, and Greek have a common Indo-European ancestor, meaning that many English words are based on Latin, either directly or through French.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Latin was a primary language of scientific communication from Roman times until the nineteenth century, and thus most of its terminology (especially fields that\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Navigating This Course\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Online Resources\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab All material is available on the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://adunning.github.io/latin-greek-scientific-terminology/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
course website
}}}
.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab This site is updated weekly with the current lecture slides.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PDFs of readings as well as assignments are on the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://portal.utoronto.ca/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Learning Portal
}}}
.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Questions? Come to my office hours.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Learning Goals\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Acquire a working vocabulary of the fundamental Greek and Latin roots, prefixes, and suffixes key to understanding scientific terms.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Develop competency in using unfamiliar words to communicate and comprehend scientific results in oral and written contexts.\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Gain the skills necessary to identify the Greek and Latin elements of scientific terminology and give their meaning.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Understand the historical processes leading to the development of current scientific terminology.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Citing a dictionary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Provide an abbreviated form of the title, followed by s.v. ({\i sub verbo}, \u8216'under the word\u8217'), and finally the headword (i.e.\u160?the word you looked up to find the entry).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Examples: {\i OED} s.v. \u8216'lecture\u8217'; {\i Taber\u8217's} s.v. \u8216'nucleopetal\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 At the bookstore\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\i Taber\u8217's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary} (any edition)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Available in an online form, but worth buying, since the ability to see adjacent entries at once is extremely useful, and some students find a printed book less distracting.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You might also want to obtain a copy of the {\i Oxford Dictionary of English}.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 What do I need to do to be successful?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The main focus: memorize and understand vocabulary (you will be tested solely on the lists provided).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Participate in classes in order to learn how to use reference tools (key to assignments).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Read assigned articles on the history of scientific terminology: information from these will appear on the tests and exam.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Vocabulary Lists\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Typed lists will be provided corresponding to each class, and these should provide a convenient way of breaking up the work.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Generally speaking, we will be concentrating on word roots (i.e.\u160?components of Greek and Latin words) rather than the full words.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab These should be fairly easy to import into your favourite software, print, etc.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Memorize!\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Use whatever strategies work for you: write out flashcards (by hand), use computer-based software (Memrise, iVocabulary, etc.).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We will be concentrating on word elements (or stems): the building blocks of words.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This is essentially giving you a more efficient method for remembering what words mean: approaching the problem scientifically.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Assignments\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Test I ({\i 16 October}): 20%\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Test II ({\i 20 November}): 20%\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Weekly Vocabulary Assignments ({\i due the day before each class}): 5%\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Vocabulary Analysis Paper ({\i due 27 November}): 15%\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Final Exam ({\i date to be announced}): 40%\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Greek Roots, Prefixes, and Suffixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Roots\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Roots are the main part of a word, and carry most of the word\u8217's force. They are originally nouns or verbs, but they have lost their characteristic endings.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab E.g. ERG-, from Greek {\i ergon}, \u8216'work\u8217', which gives us en-ERG-y\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Prefixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Prefixes, for the most part, are Greek and Latin prepositions that have become attached to the front of a word, and further specify its meaning.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Example: Syn-, from Greek \u963?\u973?\u957?/{\i syn}, \u8216'with\u8217', gives us syn-THE-sis, lit. \u8216'a putting together\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Suffixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Suffixes come at the end of a word.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Like prefixes, they also modify the meaning of a stem. They also determine the part of speech (noun, verb, adjective etc.) of the word that is formed.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Greek Prefixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 a- (an- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'not\u8217', \u8216'without\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab atheist, anaesthetic ({\i inducing a lack of sensation})\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 amphi-, ampho-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'both\u8217', \u8216'on both sides of\u8217', \u8216'around\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab amphibious, amphitheatre\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ana-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'up\u8217', \u8216'back\u8217', \u8216'again\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab analysis, anatomy, anachronism\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 anti-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'against\u8217', \u8216'opposite\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab antidote, antagonist, antarctic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 apo-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'from\u8217', \u8216'off\u8217', \u8216'away\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab apology, apostle, apheliotropism ({\i the habit in plants of bending away from the light})\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 cata-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'down\u8217', \u8216'against\u8217', \u8216'according to\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab catalyst, catastrophe, category, catholic ({\i universal}, i.e. \u8216'in respect of the whole\u8217')\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 dia- (di- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'through\u8217', \u8216'across\u8217', \u8216'between\u8217', \u8216'apart\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab diameter, diagnosis, diocese\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 dys-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bad\u8217', \u8216'disordered\u8217', \u8216'difficult\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab dysentery, dystrophy\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 es-, eis-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'inward\u8217', \u8216'into\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab esoteric, esodic (or eisodic)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ec- (ex- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'out\u8217', \u8216'out of\u8217', \u8216'outside\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab exodus, exodontist\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 en- (em-, el-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'in\u8217', \u8216'into\u8217', \u8216'inward\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab energy, embryo, emphatic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 en- + anti-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'opposite\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab enantiopathy (the treatment of disease by contraries), enantiobiosis (the condition in which associated organisms are antagonistic to each other)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 endo-, ento- (end-, ent- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'within\u8217', \u8216'inner\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab endocrine, entophyte, endarteritis, entoptic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 epi- (ep- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'upon\u8217', \u8216'on\u8217', \u8216'to\u8217', \u8216'in addition to\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab epidemic, epidermis, epitaph\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 eu-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'well\u8217', \u8216'good\u8217', \u8216'normal\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab eugenics, eulogy\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 exo-, ecto-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'outside\u8217', \u8216'external\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab exoskeleton, ectoparasite\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 hyper-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'over\u8217', \u8216'excessive\u8217', \u8216'more than normal\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab hypercritical, hypertension\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 hypo- (hyp- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'under\u8217', \u8216'below normal\u8217', \u8216'slightly\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab hypodermic, hypothesis, hyphen, hypaesthesia\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 meta-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'after\u8217', \u8216'change\u8217', \u8216'transfer\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab metamorphosis, metencephalon\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 para- (par- before vowels or h)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'beside\u8217', \u8216'resembling\u8217', \u8216'disordered\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab parasite, paratyphoid, parenthesis, paramedical\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 peri-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'around\u8217', \u8216'near\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab periscope, perimeter\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 pro-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'before\u8217', \u8216'in front of\u8217', \u8216'forward\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab program, prologue, prostate\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 pros-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'toward\u8217', \u8216'in addition\u8217', \u8216'fronting\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab proselyte, prosthetic, prosencephalon\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 syn- (sym-, syl-, sy-, sys-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'with\u8217', \u8216'together\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab synthetic, symphony, systole, synonym\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 What do I do with the readings?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Articles\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab All class readings are online.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab They will be the basis for some questions on the tests and final exam.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Make notes on these each week, to make studying for tests more efficient.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Since these function as the textbook for the course, you\u8217'll want to pay attention to key figures in the history of science that keep appearing.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab But you\u8217'll mostly want to pay attention to methodology.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Academic reading is not like reading a novel.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Critical Reading\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab To make judgements about how a text is argued.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Requires standing back from text, reflecting on it from a distance.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Read twice: once to get basic understanding, again to get detailed knowledge.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Look for \u8216'{\b ways of thinking}\u8217' rather than \u8216'information\u8217'.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Always ask \u8216'{\b how}\u8217', not \u8216'what\u8217'.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Keys to Success\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\b Do} ask, \u8216'How does this text work? How is it argued? How is the evidence (the facts, examples, etc.) used and interpreted? How does the text reach its conclusions? How appropriate is the methodology?\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\b Do not}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab extract or make lists of evidence, lists of facts, examples (when taking notes or highlighting);\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ask, \u8216'What information can I get out of this text?\u8217'\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SPAR\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Survey (begin by skimming)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Process (understand the argument)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Ask (look for patterns)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Review (make brief notes)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part I\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ALG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pain\u8217' ({\i -algesia}, \u8216'sense of pain\u8217')\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab an-ALG-esia, the inability to feel pain; an-ALG-esic, a drug acting to relieve pain; nost-ALG-ia, a sentimental longing or wistful affection for a period in the past\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ARTHR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'joint\u8217', \u8216'speech sound\u8217', \u8216'articulation\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab dys-ARTHR-ia, impairment of speech articulation\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BI-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'life\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab sym-BIO-sis, living together for mutual benefit\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BALL-, BOL-, BLE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to throw\u8217', \u8216'to put\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BALL-ist-ics; sym-BOL; em-BOL-ism, destruction of a blood vessel by foreign matter lodged in it; em-BOLO-LAL-ia, insertion of meaningless words into speech\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BRADY-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'slow\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BRADY-LEX-ia, slowness in reading; BRADY-CARD-ia, slowness of the heart\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CRYPT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hidden\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CRYPT; CRYPTO-GRAPH-y; CRYPT-ic; CRYPTO-PHYTE, a plant the produces buds underground or underwater; CRYPT-ORCH-ism; condition wherein the testes do not descend\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DROM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'running\u8217', \u8216'course\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab syn-DROME, symptoms that occur together and characterize a particular disease; a-DROM-ia; failure of impulse conduction in muscles or nerves\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'earth\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab amphi-GE-an; living around the world; GEO-CARP-y, ripening of fruits underground (peanuts, for instance)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 HOD-, OD-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'road\u8217', \u8216'way\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab HODO-phobia, fear of travel; UR-OD-eum, a tract for carrying urine\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MNE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to remember\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-MNE-sia, loss of memory; ACOU-st-a-MNE-sia, inability to remember sound; AUTO-ana-MNE-sia; history related by the patient\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MORPH-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'form\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab meta-MORPHO-sis; changing form; PHYLLO-MORPHO-sis; variation of leaves in different seasons\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ODONT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'tooth\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ex-ODONT-ist, a specialist in tooth extraction; pros-TH-ODONT-ia; the replacement of teeth by artificial means, a branch of dentistry\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PHOR-, PHER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to bear\u8217', \u8216'to go\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab eu-PHOR-ia, exaggerated feeling of well-being; meta-PHER-y, displacement of organs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PLEX-, PLEG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to strike\u8217', \u8216'to paralyse\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab apo-PLEX-y, sudden paralysis with loss of consciousness, when a blood vessel in the brain breaks or is blocked\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 POD-, -PUS\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'foot\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CEPHALO-POD; mollusc with sucker-bearing arms on its head, such as an octopus\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PROCT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'anus\u8217', \u8216'rectum\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PROCTO-logy; medical specialty concerned with the anus, the rectum and the sigmoid colon\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 STOL-, STAL-, -STLE\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to send\u8217', \u8216'to contract\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab peri-STAL-sis, rhythmic contraction of the alimentary canal that sends its contents downward; ana-STAL-sis, its opposite, the same as anti-peri-STAL-sis; sy-STOLE, contraction of the heart\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 STOM-, STOMAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'mouth\u8217', \u8216'opening\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab STOMAT-itis; inflammation of the mouth, not the stomach; ENTERO-stomy; operation to form an opening into the intestine; MICRO-STOME, a small opening or orifice\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TROP-, TREP-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to turn\u8217', \u8216'response to stimulus\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab apo-TROP-aic; intended to avert evil; ap-HELIO-TROP-ism, turning away from the sun; TREP-omena, a genus of spiral bacteria, including {\i Trepomena pallidum}, which causes syphilis.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 UR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'urine\u8217', \u8216'urinary system\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab UR-EM-ic, describes the presence of urine in the blood; UR-OD-eum, a tract for carrying urine; URE-ter, the duct by which urine passes from the kidney to the bladder or cloaca (URE-, \u8216'to urinate\u8217')\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Guide to Reference Tools\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Oxford English Dictionary ({\i OED})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The most accessible and accurate resource for detailed information on the meaning and origins of words, and is updated continuously in its online form, which can be {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oed.com.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
accessed through the library
}}}
.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Nonetheless, some of its entries have not been recently updated (some have escaped revision for over a hundred years), and it sometimes provides more specialized information than you need for a basic understanding of a word.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Oxford Dictionary of English ({\i ODE})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab For simplified definitions and etymologies, and for checking current spelling, you may instead wish to use the {\i Oxford Dictionary of English,} which is available on {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxforddictionaries.com"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Oxford Dictionaries
}}}
 (with recordings of word pronunciation).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab There are also a number of other reliable dictionaries that include etymologies, but this is the most accurate one with easy access (and Canadian/British spelling).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Oxford Latin Dictionary ({\i OLD})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The most up-to-date and accurate Latin-English dictionary, but is not yet available online, and does not include authors beyond the second century. There is a second edition (2012), but its contents are mostly unchanged from the first edition (published between 1968 and 1982).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Lewis and Short (L&S)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This is a very old book (last updated in 1879; based on an even older dictionary from the seventeenth century)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab For many purposes, however, Lewis and Short\u8217's {\i Latin Dictionary} is still the quickest reference tool, for two reasons:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab It has much broader coverage of Latin (sparodically up to the Renaissance).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab It is available online in various places; I suggest using {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://logeion.uchicago.edu/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Logeion
}}}
.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Liddell and Scott\u8217's {\i Greek-English Lexicon} (LSJ)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The most complete Greek-English lexicon.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The version online is from 1940; a supplement to it was produced in 1996, but it doesn\u8217't make much of a difference for our purposes.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Also on {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://logeion.uchicago.edu/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Logeion
}}}
.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Technical dictionaries\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://link.library.utoronto.ca/eir/EIRdetail.cfm?Resources__ID=14615"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
{\i Stedman\u8217's Medical Dictionary}
}}}
 (in reference)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://lib.myilibrary.com.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/Open.aspx?id=214017"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
{\i Taber\u8217's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary}
}}}
 (in reference)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\i Medical Meanings: A Glossary of Word Origins,} by William S. Haubrich (on reserve)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\i Elsevier\u8217's Dictionary of Chemoetymology} (in reference)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 How do I find an etymology?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab If it\u8217's a common word, start with the {\i Oxford Dictionary of English}, which will give you the simplest derivation.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab If it\u8217's not there, move on to the {\i Oxford English Dictinary}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Look in a technical dictionary such as {\i Taber\u8217's} or Haubrich. Sometimes this will not provide enough information.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Look in a Latin or Greek dictionary.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part II\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BUL- (BOUL-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'will\u8217', \u8216'volition\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-BUL-ia, loss of ability to make decisions\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CARDI-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'heart\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MYO-CARDI-al, pertaining to the muscular tissue of the heart\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CEPHAL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'head\u8217' (enCEPHAL-, \u8216'brain\u8217')\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CEPHALO-POD; pros-ENCEPHAL-on, forebrain or anterior brain vesicle of the embryo; met-ENCEPHAL-on\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CHONDR-, CHONDRI-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'cartilage\u8217', \u8216'granule\u8217' (orig, \u8216'groat (hulled grain) of wheat\u8217')\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab peri-CHONDRI-um; fibrous connective tissue covering cartilage\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DEM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'people\u8217', \u8216'country\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab apo-DEMI-ALG-ia, morbid dislike of home life and a desire to wander; epi-DEM-ic, occurring widely within a certain geographic area; ec-DEM-ic, of foreign origin, opp. of en-DEM-ic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DERM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'skin\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PODO-DERM; dermal layer of a hoof; the DERM-is is between the epi-DERM-is and the subcutaneous tissues\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GAM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'marriage\u8217', \u8216'union\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-GAMO-GENE-sis, asexual reproduction; GAM-ete, a sexual cell capable of uniting with another to form a new individual, such as sperms and eggs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LECITH-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'yolk\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CENTRO-LECITH-al, having the yolk aggregated in the centre; LECITH-in describes a group of yellow-brown fatty substances first isolated in egg yolks\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 OPHTHALM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'eye\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MEGAL-OPHTHALM-us or MEG-OPTHALM-us, excessive largeness of the eyes\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 OST(E)-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bone\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab OSTEO-DERM-ia, bony formations in the skin; OSTE-ana-GENE-sis, regeneration of bone\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PHYLL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'leaf\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PHYLLO-POD-ous, having leaflike swimming feet, as in branchiopods, (some shrimp, for instance)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PHYT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'plant\u8217', \u8216'growth\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab endo-PHYTE, a plant growing within another; ZOO-PHYTE, an animal resembling a plant, such as a sponge\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PLAS(T)-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to form\u8217', \u8216'to mould\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab hyper-PLAS-ia, excessive formation of tissue; meta-PLAS-ia, transformation of one form of adult tissue to another\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SOM-, SOMAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'body\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SOM-AESTHE-sia, sensibility to bodily sensations; GYMNO-SOMAT-ous, having no shell or mantle, as certain molluscs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 THEC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'case\u8217', \u8216'sheath\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab THECA, spore or pollen case; THECA-PHORE, a structure on which a theca is borne; THEC-ODONT, having teeth in sockets\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 THERM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'heat\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-dia-THERM-ancy, imperviousness to heat waves; hyper-THERM-algesia, abnormal sensitivity to heat\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TOM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'cut\u8217', \u8216'section\u8217' (enTOM-, \u8216'insect\u8217')\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LITHO-TOM-ous, stone-boring, as certain molluscs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TOP-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'place\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-TOPO-GNO-sia, lack of ability to locate a sensation accurately; OST-ec-TOP-y, displacement of a bone\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TROPH-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'nourishment\u8217', \u8216'development\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab AUTO-TROPH, organism capable of self-nourishment; TROPHO-TROP-ism, tendency of an organism to turn towards its food supply; dys-TROPH-y; deficiency of nourishment\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ZO-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'animal\u8217', \u8216'living being\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ZOO-logy; ZOO-GAM-y, sexual reproduction in animals; ZOO-PHYTE\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Your Assignments\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Vocabulary Analyses\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab For each class, a link to a recent scientific article is provided on the Learning Portal.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Provide a list of ten words that you think have Greek and Latin words.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The mark is pass/fail (based on whether you completed it or not; the final mark will also take class participation into account).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 An example\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Hofmann, Rebecca, and P. Martin Sander. 2014. \u8216'The First Juvenile Specimens of {\i Plateosaurus Engelhardti} from Frick, Switzerland: Isolated Neural Arches and Their Implications for Developmental Plasticity in a Basal Sauropodomorph\u8217'. {\i PeerJ} 2 (July): e458. doi:{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj.458"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
10.7717/peerj.458
}}}
.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab dinosaur\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab modern Latin, {\i dinosaurus}, from Greek \u948?\u949?\u953?\u957?\u972?\u962?/{\i deinos} (fearful, terrible) + \u963?\u945?\u8166?\u961?\u959?\u962?/{\i sauros} lizard ({\i OED} s.v. \u8216'dinosaur\u8217')\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab morphometric\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab plasticity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab [etc.]\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Final Vocabulary Paper\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A formal version of the weekly vocabulary assignments, applying the skills you\u8217've been practising each week.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://adunning.github.io/latin-greek-scientific-terminology/assignments/vocabulary-analysis-paper/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Full details online
}}}
.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part III\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ACOU-, (ACU-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to hear\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ACOU-smat-a-GNO-sis; inability to recognize spoken words; an-ACU-sia, complete deafness\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 AMBLY-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'dull\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab AMBLY-CEPHAL-idae, a genus of broad-headed, nonpoisonous snakes, bluntheads; AMBLY-ACU-sia\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ANTH-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'flower\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ANTHO-philous, attracted by flowers, feeding on flowers; ex-ANTH-ema, an eruption on the skin\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CHROM-, CHROMAT-, CHRO-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'colour\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab meta-CHRO-sis, the change or play of colours seen in the squid, chameleon, etc.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DACTYL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'finger\u8217', \u8216'toe\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab DACTYLO-lysis, a tropical disease in which a toe is slowly and spontaneously amputated by a fibrous ring\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DE-; DESM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to bind\u8217'; \u8216'binding\u8217', \u8216'ligament\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab amphi-DESM-ic, furnished with a double ligament; syn-DESMO-logy, the study of ligaments; syn-DE-sis, the state of being bound together\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ENTER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'intestine\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab an-ENTER-ous, having no alimentary tract; MY-ENTER-ic, relating to the muscular coat of the intestine; dys-ENTER-y\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ERG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'work\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab endo-ERG-ic; relating to the absorption of heat, endothermic; ADREN-ERG-ic, activated by adrenaline\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 AESTHE-, (ESTHE-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to feel\u8217', \u8216'to perceive\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab syn-AESTHE-sia, a secondary sensation accompanying an actual perception; ACANTH-AESTHE-sia, a sensation as of pricking with a needle\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GER-, GERONT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'old person\u8217', \u8216'old age\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GERONTO-phobia, morbid fear of old age; GER-ODONT-ia, dentistry for the aged; GERONTO-logy\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GNATH-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'jaw\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab dys-GNATH-ic, pertaining to improperly developed jaws; GNATHO-THECA, the horny outer covering of a bird\u8217's lower jaw\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GNO-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to know\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BAR-a-GNO-sis; loss of perception of weight; AUTO-TOP-a-GNO-sia, loss of ability to orient parts of one\u8217's own body\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GRAPH-, GRAM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to write\u8217'; \u8216'thing written\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab DROMO-GRAPH, instrument for registering the velocity of blood current\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 HEPAT-, HEPAR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'liver\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab HEPAR-in, a substance or mixture of substances occurring in liver and other tissues having the property of prolonging the clotting time of blood; HEPAT-itis, inflammation of the liver\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 KINE- (CINE-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to move\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab a-KIN-AESTHE-sia, loss of muscle sense or sense of movement; eu-KINE-sia; normal power of movement; TELE-KINE-sis; the alleged ability to move objects without touching them\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LEX-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to read\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BRADY-LEX-ia, abnormal slowness in reading; dys-LEX-ia, impairment of the ability to read\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MY-, MYS-, MYOS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'muscle\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MYO-CHROME, any muscle pigment; MY-ENTER-ic; MYO-CARDI-al\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NEPHR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'kidney\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab peri-NEPHR-ium, the connective or adipose tissue surrounding a kidney\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 OSM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'smell\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab an-OSM-ia, absence of the sense of smell; MACR-OSM-atic, possessing a highly developed sense of smell\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 THE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to put\u8217', \u8216'to place\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ALL-en-THE-sis, introduction of foreign substance into the body; meta-THE-sis, a chemical reaction in which there is an exchange of radicals\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 How much anatomical vocabulary is from Greek and Latin?\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 About 89 per cent\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab According to Turmezei (2012); 86% without post-classical Latin.\sa180\par}
}
