{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Greek and Latin in Scientific Terminology, Lecture 10\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Andrew Dunning\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  13 November 2014\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Practice Test\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 I. Translate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 con-greg-ate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'with\u8217', \u8216'together\u8217' + \u8216'flock\u8217' + \u8216'having\u8217', \u8216'having the shape of\u8217', \u8216'characterized by having\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ante-dors-al\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'before\u8217', \u8216'in front of\u8217' + \u8216'back\u8217' + \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 di-vert\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'apart\u8217', \u8216'in different directions\u8217', \u8216'thoroughly\u8217' + \u8216'to turn\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 dur-able\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hard\u8217' + \u8216'able to be\u8217', \u8216'able to\u8217', \u8216'tending to\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ad-HER-ent\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to\u8217', \u8216'toward\u8217', \u8216'near\u8217' + \u8216'to stick\u8217' + \u8216'person who\u8217', \u8216'that which\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 II. Interpret\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Prefixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 {\b Di}cynodonts are an {\b ex}clusively herbivorous clade of synapsids.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 They {\b com}prise more than 100 species that are known from the Middle Permian the Late Triassic periods Dicynodonts were morphologically {\b dis}parate and {\b pre}sented a wide range of sizes and putative ecological niches, {\b in}cluding semi-aquatic, fossorial, arboreal and grazing.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b De}spite over 150 years of {\b di}cynodont research, several paleobiological aspects of the neuroanatomy, inner ear morphology and {\b inter}nal cranium anatomy remain practically {\b ob}scure.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Moreover, because the {\b de}structive technique of serial sampling was the primary way to access the {\b inter}nal anatomy of {\b di}cynodont skulls, the data available for various taxa was {\b in}consistent and rarely subjected to synthetic treatments.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 As a {\b re}sult, details of {\b inter}nal skull anatomy have been overlooked in {\b re}cent phylogenetic analyses. Only Surkov and Benton {\b in}cluded a large number of braincase characters in a phylogenetic analysis of {\b di}cynodonts.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b Re}cent {\b ad}vances in non-destructive imaging techniques such as high resolution {\b com}puted tomography, neutron tomography, and synchrotron radiation based micro-computed tomography, hold the potential to {\b pro}vide significant new {\b in}sight {\b in}to fossil skull morphology. However, the {\b ap}plication of such techniques to {\b di}cynodonts has been limited.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 in\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'into\u8217', \u8216'on\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 de-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'down\u8217', \u8216'away\u8217', \u8216'off\u8217', \u8216'thoroughly\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 di-, dis-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'apart\u8217', \u8216'in different directions\u8217', \u8216'thoroughly\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 con\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'with\u8217', \u8216'together\u8217', \u8216'very\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ex-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'out\u8217', \u8216'from\u8217', \u8216'removal\u8217', \u8216'completely\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 pro-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'forward\u8217', \u8216'in front of\u8217'\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Wood Roots\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The sheep used in these {\b experiments} were cared as per outlined in the Guide for the Care and {\b Use} of {\b Animals} in {\b Agricultural} Research and Teaching {\b Consortium} [8]. Thirty {\b affected} and 30 {\b unaffected} sheep were slaughtered with {\b electrical} stunning then {\b exsanguination} \u8230?.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The {\b study} {\b area} was located in a region {\b adjoined} by the {\b provinces} of Guizhou, Yunnan, and Sichuan (26\u176?56\u8217'-27\u176?47\u8217' N, 103\u176?56\u8217'-104\u176?51\u8217' E), with the average {\b elevation} 2100 m above the sea {\b level}, the {\b annual} {\b precipitation} 956 mm, and the average {\b atmospheric temperature} 9\u8211-11\u176?C.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The {\b main} grassland {\b species} {\b include} Puccinellia ({\i Chinam {\b poensis} ohuji}), Siberian {\b Nitraria} ({\b {\i Nitraria}} sibirica {\b {\i pall}}), {\b Floriated astragalus} ({\b {\i Astragalus floridus}}), {\b Poly-branched astragals} ({\i A.} {\b {\i polycladus}}), {\b Falcate} whin ({\b {\i Oxytropis falcate}}), Ewenki {\b automomous} banner ({\b {\i Elymus nutans}}), {\b Common leymus} ({\b {\i Leymus secalinus}}), and June grass ({\b {\i Koeleria cristata}}).\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Most of the {\b plants} are {\b herbaceous} and good {\b resources} for grazing {\b animals}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Verb-Forming Suffixes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to make\u8217', \u8216'to treat\u8217', \u8216'to do something with\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab alleviate, obviate, illuminate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NB: This suffix often combines with the noun-forming suffix -ion (e.g.\u160?illumination)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -fy\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to make\u8217', \u8216'to cause\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab terrify, liquify, pacify\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NB: The adjective ending that corresponds to -fy is -fic, \u8216'making\u8217', \u8216'causing\u8217' (e.g.\u160?terrific, pacific)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -igate, -egate\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to make\u8217', \u8216'to drive\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab mitigate, fumigate, navigate, variegate\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -esce\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to begin\u8217', \u8216'to be somewhat\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab effervescent, convalescent, arborescent\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Declensions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Inflection\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Inflection is the changing of a word\u8217's form to reflect its grammatical role in a sentence.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Like Greek, Latin is a highly inflected language. The form of a word can vary based on gender, number and case (nouns and adjectives) or on person, number, tense and mood (verbs).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We will learn how how to decline some Latin nouns and adjectives in two out of six cases.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Cases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The nominative case is used for the subject of a sentence. This is the a word\u8217's dictionary form.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The genitive case is used for a word that depends on another. It can usually be translated using the word \u8216'of\u8217'.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Each case also has singular and plural forms. For example:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab lingua (nom. sing.) = \u8216'tongue\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab linguae (nom. plur.) = \u8216'tongues\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab linguae (gen. sing.) = \u8216'of the tongue\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab linguarum (gen. plur.) = \u8216'of the tongues\u8217'\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Genders\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab In Latin, nouns are masculine, feminine or neuter. For our purposes, you can always infer the gender of a noun from its ending (though in fact real Latin is not so regular).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The first declension is made up of words ending in \u8216'-a\u8217', which are nearly always feminine.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The second declension is made up of words ending in \u8216'-us\u8217', which are nearly always masculine, and words ending in \u8216'-um\u8217', which are neuter.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 First declension\par}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx2880\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx5760\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Singular\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Plural\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Nominative\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -a (e.g.\u160?lingua)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -ae (e.g.\u160?linguae)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Genitive\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -ae (e.g.\u160?linguae)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -arum (e.g.\u160?linguarum)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Second declension (masculine)\par}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx2880\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx5760\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Singular\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Plural\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Nominative\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -us (e.g.\u160?nervus)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -i (e.g.\u160?nervi)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Genitive\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -i (e.g.\u160?nervi)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -orum (e.g.\u160?nervorum)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Second declension (neuter)\par}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx2880\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx5760\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Singular\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Plural\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Nominative\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -um (e.g.\u160?labium)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -a (e.g.\u160?labia)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx2880\cellx5760\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Genitive\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -i (e.g.\u160?labii)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 -orum (e.g.\u160?labiorum)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Thus {\i arcus costarum} is \u8216'arch of the ribs\u8217' and {\i venae oculi} is \u8216'the veins of the eye\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NB: Latin has neither the definite (\u8216'the\u8217') nor the indefinite (\u8216'a/an\u8217') article. Therefore {\i vena} may be translated as \u8216'vein\u8217', \u8216'a vein\u8217' or \u8216'the vein\u8217', whichever seems appropriate.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Adjectives\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Latin adjectives must agree in gender (masculine, feminine or neuter), number (plural or singular) and case with the adjectives they modify. In real Latin, adjectives can be placed almost anywhere in a sentence, but in scientific expressions they usually follow the noun the modify.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab The adjectives you will see belong to a group that takes the endings of the first or the second declension, as longus, -a, -um\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Thus we could have {\i nervus longus, lingua longa,} or {\i labium longum.}\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Example Phrases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 {\i camera oculi}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab chamber of the eye\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 {\i musculus flexor digiti quinti}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab the muscle (that is the) bender of the fifth finger\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 {\i bursae subcutaneae}\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab subcutaneous bags; bags under the skin\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Problems in Modern Scientific Communication\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Case Study: The Discovery of Germs\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab See {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ErpMhBiVyrc#t=42m46s"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
\u8216'Blood and Guts\u8217', ep. 5
}}}
, starting at 42m46s: discusses Ignaz Semmelweis and Louis Pasteur.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Book published in 1861, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.deutschestextarchiv.de/book/show/semmelweis_kindbettfieber_1861"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
{\i Die \u196?tiologie, der Begriff und die Prophylaxe des Kindbettfiebers}
}}}
 ({\i The Aetiology, Concept, and Prophylaxis of Childbed Fever}).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Would you be convinced of the argument for a change of practice?\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How could the following passage from Semmelweis be made clearer?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 The only cause of childbed fever is decaying animal-organic matter that is either introduced to the individual from external sources or generated internally. Thus, the prophylaxis of childbed fever involves preventing the introduction of external decaying matter, preventing the internal generation of decaying matter, and removing as quickly as possible any existing decaying matter or preventing its resorption. (trans. K. Codell Carter, p.\u160?163)\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Terms used in the title of the book are superficially precise, but mask an uncertainty about the cause:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i aetiology} is from Greek {\i aitiologia}, from {\i aitia} \u8216'a cause\u8217' + {\i -logia};\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\i prophylaxis} is from Greek {\i phulaxis}, \u8216'act of guarding\u8217'.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab What happens when we lack terminology to describe observed phenomena?\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Suffixes III\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -itude\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'quality of\u8217', \u8216'state of\u8217' ({\i -itudo})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab longitude, multitude, gratitude\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ity (-ety, -ty)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'quality of\u8217', \u8216'state of\u8217' ({\i -itas})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab gravity, dexterity, brevity\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ance, -ancy; -ence, -ency\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'quality of being\u8217', \u8216'state of being\u8217' ({\i -antia, -entia})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab vigilance, hesitancy, eloquence, innocence, fluency\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -or\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'she or he who\u8217', \u8216'that which\u8217' ({\i -or})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab actor, motor, victor, incisor\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ion\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'act of\u8217', \u8216'state of\u8217', \u8216'result of the of\u8217' ({\i -io})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab action, commotion, incision\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ure\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'act of\u8217', \u8216'result of the act of\u8217' ({\i -ura})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab rupture, capture, fracture\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -us\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'act of\u8217', \u8216'result of the act of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab prospectus, consensus, impetus\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -or (-our)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'state of\u8217', \u8216'result of the act of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab tumour, pallor, error\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -men, -min-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217', \u8216'act of\u8217' ({\i -men})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab specimen, regimen, acumen, acuminate\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ment ({\i -mentum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217', \u8216'act of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ligament, ferment, excrement, momentum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ble, -bul- ({\i -bula, -bulum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of the act of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217', \u8216'place for\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab fable, fabulous, mandible, mandibular, pabulum, infundibulum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -cle, -cul- ({\i -culum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of the act of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab spectacle, receptacle, obstacle, tentacle, tentacular, curriculum, vinculum, tentaculum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -crum, -cr-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of the act of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab fulcrum, simulacrum, involucrum, involucral\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -trum, -tr-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'result of the act of\u8217', \u8216'means of\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab spectrum, rostrum, claustrum, claustrophobia\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Pluralization\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Dirckx and Leider (1981)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab When dealing with Latin nouns and adjectives in their original form, there are several different ways of pluralizing them.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab This follows a consistent pattern, follows the word\u8217's declension and gender (i.e.\u160?grammatical categorization).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Words that have been anglicized, on the other hand, tend to follow English conventions.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab For example, the correct Latin plural of {\i apparatus} (fourth declension, masculine) is {\i apparatus}, but in English it more typically {\i apparatuses}.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab How can you figure this out without memorizing the full forms of Latin words and the tables of declensions? A medical dictionary such as Taber\u8217's will provide the plural forms for technical words.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Failing that, use the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?la=latin"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Perseus Word Study Tool
}}}
, which will tell you the word\u8217's declension, gender, and case. If necessary, you can then look up a table of Latin nouns (as the one in this article) to find out what form the plural takes.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 First Declension\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\i -a} (occasionally {\i -e}) becomes {\i -ae}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Feminine and masculine words have the same form.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab areola, areolae; fossa, fossae; lamina, laminae\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Second Declension\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Masculine: {\i -us} and {\i -er} (occasionally {\i -os}) become {\i -i}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Neuter: {\i -um} (occasionally {\i -on}) becomes {\i -a}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab cactus, cacti; sulcus, sulci; bacillus, bacilli\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab puer, pueri; ager, agri\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Third Declension\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Masculine and feminine: words with various endings are pluralized with {\i -es}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Neuter: plural in {\i -a}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab These are words in which the declined form is based on the genitive (possessive) form rather than the typical nominative form (i.e.\u160?the form the word takes when it is the subject).\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab For example, the plural of {\i mens} (genitive {\i mentis}) is {\i mentes}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab viscus (visceris), viscera; corpus (corporis), corpora; crus (cruris), crura\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Fourth Declension\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Masculine and feminine: {\i -us} remains {\i -us}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Neuter: {\i -u} becomes {\i -a}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ductus, ductus; fetus, fetus; meatus, meatus\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Fifth Declension\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Masculine and feminine: {\i -es} remains {\i -es}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab canities, canities; scabies, scabies\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part I\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ADIP-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'fat\u8217' ({\i adeps})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ADIP-os-ity, corpulence, obesity\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CALL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hard skin\u8217' ({\i callus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CALL-ous, pertaining to an are of hardened and thickened skin, a CALLUS; CORPUS CALLOSUM, a structure of white matter in the brain\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CRE-, CRESC-, CRET-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to grow\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-CRE-ment; CRESC-ent; CRESC-endo; con-CRESC-ence, a growing together of the roots of two teeth; inter-CRESC-ence, a growing into each other, as of tissue\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FA-, FAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to speak\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab af-FA-ble; in-ef-FA-ble; FA-ble; in-FA-nt, a child, usually up to two years (in Latin, literally \u8216'not speaking\u8217' or \u8216'without speech\u8217')\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FLU-, FLUX-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to flow\u8217'; FLUVI-, \u8216'river\u8217' ({\i fluvius})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-FLU-ence; FLU-ency; af-FLUX, flow of blood or other fluid to a part; con-FLU-ent, running together, the opposite of discrete; in anatomy, coalesced or blended (applied to two or bones originally separate)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FOSS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'ditch\u8217', \u8216'trench\u8217', \u8216'to dig\u8217' ({\i fossa})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FOSSA, a pit or trench-like depression; FOSS-ette, a small pit or a socket containing the base of the antennule in arthropods; FOSS-ori-al, adapted for digging (applies to the claws and feet of animals)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MAGN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'large\u8217', \u8216'great\u8217' ({\i magnus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MAGN-ate; MAGN-ANIM-ous; MAGNI-LOQU-ent; MAGNI-fy, cause to appear larger; MAGN-itude, spacial quality or size\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MAMM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'breast\u8217' ({\i mamma})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MAMM-al; MAMM-il-itis, inflammation of the MAM-illa, or nipple\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MORT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'death\u8217' ({\i mors})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MORT-al, liable to death or causing death; MORT-al-ity, the quality of being mortal or the death rate; NATI-MORT-al-ity, the proportion of stillbirths to the general birth rate\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NOC-, NOX-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'harm\u8217' ({\i noxa})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-NOC-ent; NOCI-FENS-or, efferent fibres which release chemical substances at their terminals, thus stimulating pain endings; NOCI-per-CEPT-ion, perception of pain by the central nervous system\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to spread or lie open\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PAT-ent, open, exposed; pre-PAT-ent period, the period in parasitic disease between the introduction of the organism and its demonstration in the body\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PET-, PETIT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to seek\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PET-it-ion; com-PET-it-ion; PET-ul-ant; RECTI-PET-al-ity, the tendency to rectilinear growth; ACRO-PET-al, ascending (applies to leaves, flowers or roots developing successively from an axis so that the youngest arise at the apex)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PROPRI-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'one\u8217's own\u8217' ({\i proprius})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ap-PROPRI-ate; ex-PROPRI-ate; im-PROPRI-ety; PROPRIO-SPIN-al, pertaining wholly to the spinal cord (applies to fibres)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SEC-, SEG-, SECT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to cut\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-SECT; re-SECT-ion, the operation of cutting out as the removal of a segment or section of an organ; SECT-or-ial, formed or adapted for cutting, as certain teeth\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SED- (-SID-), SESS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to sit\u8217', \u8216'to settle\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab re-SIDE; pre-SID-ent; SESS-ion; in-SESS-or-ial, adapted for perching; re-SID-ual, pertaining to that which cannot be evacuated or discharged (as residual air in the lungs, residual urine in the bladder)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SET-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bristle\u8217' ({\i seta})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SETA, any bristle-like structure, as the sporophore of liverworts and mosses; SETI-GER, a segment or process bearing bristles\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TRACT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to draw\u8217', \u8216'to drag\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab TRACT-or; at-TRACT-ive; dis-TRACT-ile, widely separate (usually applies to long-stalked anthers); CEPHALO-TRACT-or, obstetric forceps\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TUBER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'swelling\u8217' ({\i tuber})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab TUBER, a thickened, fleshy underground stem with surface buds; TUBER-iform, resembling or shaped like a tuber; TUBER-in, a simple protein of the globular type which occurs in potatoes\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VEH-, VECT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to carry\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ad-VEH-ent, afferent, carrying to an organ; con-VECT-ion, a transmission or carrying, as of heat; VECT-or\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VIT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'life\u8217' ({\i vita})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab VIT-al, pertaining to or necessary for life; AQUA VITAE, spirit or eau-de-vie\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part II\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CAV-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hollow\u8217' ({\i cavus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CAVI-CORN, hollow-horned; inter-CAV-it-ary, within a CAV-ity\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 COCT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to cook\u8217', \u8216'to boil\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab con-COCT-ion, preparation made by combining different crude ingredients; COCTO-STA-ble, able to withstand the temperature of boiling water without change\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CUT-, CUSS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to shake\u8217', \u8216'to strike\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab con-CUSS-ion, shock, the state of being shaken, a severe shaking or jarring of a part; per-CUSS-ion, the act of firmly tapping the surface of the body with a finger or a small hammer to elicit sounds or vibratory sensations of diagnostic value\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DOL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to feel pain\u8217', \u8216'to cause pain\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab con-DOL-ence; in-DOL-ent, sluggish, usually applied to slowness in healing or growing, as an indolent ulcer, or causing little or no pain, as an indolent tumour\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 EBURN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'ivory\u8217' ({\i ebur, eburnus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab EBURN-eous, ivory white, white more or less tinged with yellow; EBURN-itis, increased hardness and density of the tooth enamel\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FENESTR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'window\u8217', \u8216'opening\u8217' ({\i fenestra})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FENESTR-ate, having small perforations or transparent spots (applies to insect wings); CRANIO-FENESTR-ia, congenital bony defect involving the total thickness of the skull, lacuna skull\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GLUTIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'glue\u8217' ({\i gluten})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GLUTEN, a mixture of proteins found in the seeds of cereals, which confers the property of toughness to dough; GLUTIN-ous, viscid, gluelike\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 HI-, HIAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to stand open\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab HIAT-us, a space or opening; de-HI-sc-ence, the spontaneous opening of an organ or structure along certain lines in a definite direction; in-de-HI-sc-ent, not splitting at maturity (applies to certain fruits)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 I-, IT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to go\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-IT-ial; ex-IT; ob-IT-uary; amb-IT-us, the outer edge or margin or the outline of an echinoid shell viewed from the apical pole; ab-I-ent, tending away from the source of stimulus (opp. ad-I-ent)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LAMIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'thin plate\u8217' ({\i lamina}); LAMELL-, dimin. ({\i lamella})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LAMIN-ate; LAMELLA, a plate or layer; LAMELLI-CORN, having antenna joints expanded into flattened plates; LAMIN-ectomy, surgical removal of one or more neural laminas of the vertebrae\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'broad\u8217', \u8216'wide\u8217' ({\i latus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab di-LAT-ion; LATI-SQUAM-ate, broad-scaled\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LIG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to bind\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ob-LIG-at-ion; al-LIG-at-or; LIG-ament, a band of tough, flexible connective tissue; LIG-at-ure, a cord or thread for tying vessels or the act of tying or binding\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MEAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to go\u8217', \u8216'to pass\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MEATUS, an opening or passage; MEAT-itis, inflammation of the wall of a meatus; SUPRA-MEAT-al, applies to triangle and spine over external acoustic meatus\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MIT(T)-, MIS(S)-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to send\u8217', \u8216'to let go\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e-MISS-ary, any venous channel through the skull connecting the venous sinuses with the diploic veins and veins of the scalp; intro-MISS-ion, insertion, the act of putting in, the introduction of one body into another\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PLEX-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to interweave\u8217', \u8216'to braid\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PLEXUS, a network of interlacing nerves or anastomosing blood vessels or lymphatics; PLEX-iform, resembling a plexus or network; PLEX-ODONT, having molar teeth with complicated crown patterns and multiple roots\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PUNG-, PUNCT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to prick\u8217', \u8216'point\u8217' ({\i punctum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab com-PUNCT-ion; PUNCT-uate; PUNCT-il-ious; PUNCT-iform, having the nature of qualities of a point, or seeming to be located at a point (of a sensation), or in bacteriology, very minute colonies; PUNG-ent, ending in a rigid and sharp point\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 RIG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to be stiff\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab RIG-id, stiff or hard; RIG-esc-ent, becoming rigid; RIGID-itas, stiffness, rigidity\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 RUB(R)-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'red\u8217' ({\i ruber})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BILI-RUBR-in, a reddish-yellow pigment of bile and blood; RUBIGIN-ose, of a brownish-red tint, rust-coloured; e-RUB-esc-ent, blushing red\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SCRIB-, SCRIPT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to write\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab de-SCRIBE; pre-SCRIBE; sub-SCRIBE; circum-SCRIPT, a marginal sphincter when sharply defined, as in sea anemones\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VOLV-, VOLUT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to roll\u8217', \u8216'to turn\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab in-VOLVE; re-VOLUT-ion; VOLUTE; ob-VOLUTE, bent downward and inward (applies to wings, elytra of insects); VOLV-ulus, a twisting of the bowel upon itself so as to occlude the lumen\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part III\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 AG-, ACT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to do\u8217', \u8216'to drive\u8217', \u8216'to act\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ACT-ion; AG-ile; CUTI-re-ACT-ion, a local skin reaction following inoculation with or the application of extracts of pathogenic organisms\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ALB-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'white\u8217' ({\i albus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ALBI-FACT-ion, the act or process of blanching or rendering white; ALBUM-in, a protein substance found in nearly every animal and some vegetable tissue; ALBUR-num, sapwood or splint wood (i.e., the soft, white substance between the inner bark and true wood)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'wax\u8217' ({\i cera})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CERI-FER-ous, wax-bearing, waxy; CERE-ous, waxy\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FIL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'thread\u8217' ({\i filum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FILI-GER-ous, with threadlike outgrowths or flagella; FIL-ar-iasis, a diseased state due to the presence of nematode worms of the super family Filarioidea\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FOR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to bore\u8217', \u8216'to pierce\u8217' ({\i forare})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FOR-amen, the opening through the coats of an ovule, or any small perforation; FOR-amin-ule, a minute foramen; FOR-amini-FER-a, an order of protozoans with calcareous shells with minute openings for pseudopodia\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FOV-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pit\u8217' ({\i fovea})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FOVEA, a small pit, fossa or depression, or a small hollow at leaf base; FOVE-ate, pitted; FOVE-ol-ate, having regular, small depressions\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FUNG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'mushroom\u8217', \u8216'fungus\u8217' ({\i fungus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FUNGI-VOR-ous, fungus-eating animals and plants; FUNG-at-ion, the act of growing up rapidly, like a fungus (as certain pathologic growths); FUNG-os-ity, fungous excrescence, fungous quality\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GLOMER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'ball of yarn\u8217' ({\i glomus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GLOMUS, a fold of the mesothelium containing a ball of blood vessels; con-GLOMER-ation, that which is made up of parts from various sources\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 HAL-, HALIT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to breathe\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab HALIT-us, a vapour, as that expired by the lungs; HALIT-osis, the state of having offensive breath\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MUC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'mucus\u8217' ({\i mucus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MUCI-fic, mucus-secreting; MUCO-CUT-aneous, pertaining to skin and mucous membrane\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NUTRI-, NUTRIT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to nourish\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NUTRIC-ism, a relationship of two animals with all the benefit to one partment; NUTRI-ent, that which affords nutrition\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PALP-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to touch\u8217', \u8216'to stroke\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab im-PALP-able, not capable of being felt, imperceptible to touch; PALP-it-at-ion, any heart action of which the patient is conscious PALPO-CIL, a stiff, sensory filament attached to sense cells of Hydromedusae\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SEP-, SEPT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to separate\u8217', \u8216'wall\u8217' ({\i septum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SEPTUM, a partition, a dividing wall between two spaces or cavities; e-SEPT-ate, not supplied with septa; SEPT-ectomy, excision of part of the nasal septum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SPIR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to breathe\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SPIRIT; con-SPIRE; a-SPIR-at-or, a negative pressure apparatus for withdrawing liquids from cavities; su-SPIR-at-ion, a sigh, the act of sighing; tran-SPIR-at-ion, exhalation of vapour through pores or stomata\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 STRU-, STRUCT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to construct\u8217', \u8216'to build\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab STRUCT-ure; de-STRUCT-ion; ob-STRU-ent, obstructing, tending to obstruct\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TERMIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'end\u8217', \u8216'boundary\u8217' ({\i terminus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ab-TERMIN-al, going from the end inward; at-TERMIN-al, toward the terminal; co-TERMIN-ous, having the same or coincident boundaries\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 UMBR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'shade\u8217', \u8216'shadow\u8217' ({\i umbra})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab UMBR-age; ad-UMBR-ate; ex-UMBR-al, pertaining to the rounded upper surface of a jellyfish; ob-UMBR-ate, with some structure overhanging the parts so as partially to conceal them; UMBR-aculum, any umbrellalike structure\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 UNGU-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'nail\u8217' (of finger or toe) ({\i unguis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab UNGUI-FER-ate, having nails, claws or hooklike processes; UNGUI-cul-ata, Mammalia with nails or claws as distinguished from hoofed mammals and cetaceans\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VEL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'veil\u8217', \u8216'covering\u8217' ({\i velum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab VELUM, a membrane or structure similar to a veil; VELI-GER, second stage in larval life of certain molluscs when the head bears a velum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VISCER-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'entrails\u8217' ({\i viscus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e-VISCER-at-ion, removal of internal organs; VISCERO-SENS-ory, relating to sensation in the viscera\sa180\par}
}
