{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Greek and Latin in Scientific Terminology, Lecture 8\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  Andrew Dunning\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0  30 October 2014\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Last Class\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Introduction to Latin\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab We examined:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Latin prefixes;\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab The history of Latin and it history in the ancient Roman world;\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Scientific texts in late antiquity.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Negation: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.bmj.sk/2006/10708-13.pdf"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Dz\u780?uganova\u769? (2006)
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Negative prefixes:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab a-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab dis-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab in-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab non-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab un-\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Only one negative suffix: -less\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Final Assignment\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Vocabulary Analysis Paper\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab A slightly more advanced version of your weekly vocabulary analyses:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Select twenty terms from two recent (2014) articles in peer-reviewed scientific journals.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Analyse their etymology and meaning, showing their breakdown into individual roots (as in the vocabulary list).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://adunning.github.io/latin-greek-scientific-terminology/assignments/vocabulary-analysis-paper/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Full details on the course website.
}}}
\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab You should use at least three professional dictionaries (or other appropriate scholarly sources; a bibliography will be distributed) to support your findings. Sources are only acceptable if they have gone through a peer-review process (any academic dictionary).\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Articles must be fully cited using either the author-date system of the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
{\i Chicago Manual of Style}
}}}
 (used in the syllabus) or another style relevant to your discipline.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Must be written in a prose format (i.e.\u160?not point-form).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Suffixes I\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -al, (-ial, -eal)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -alis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab abdominal, legal, oral, corporal\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ile, -il\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -ilis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab hostile, juvenile, virile, civil\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ar\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -aris})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab lunar, solar, popular\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ine\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -inus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab bovine, marine, feminine\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ic, -tic\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217' ({\i -icus, -ticus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab pelvic, civic, lunatic\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ary\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'connected with\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -arius})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab military, literary, sanguinary\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -an, -ane\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'pertaining to\u8217', \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -anus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab urban, veteran, Canadian\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -form (usually -iform)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'like\u8217', \u8216'having the shape of\u8217' ({\i -formis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab reniform, muriform, oviform\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ate (occasionally -ite)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'having\u8217', \u8216'having the shape of\u8217', \u8216'characterized by having\u8217' ({\i -atus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab effeminate, accurate, dentate, favourite\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -(u)lent, -(o)lent\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'full of\u8217', \u8216'disposed to\u8217' ({\i -lentus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab fraudulent, purulent, sanguinolent, virulent\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ose\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'full of\u8217' ({\i -osus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab verbose, rugose, comatose\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -ous (-ious, -eous)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'full of\u8217', \u8216'having the character of\u8217' ({\i -osus, -us})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab various, populous, nervous\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 -aceous\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'belonging to\u8217', \u8216'resembling\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab herbaceous, cretaceous, chartaceous\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Medieval Contributions to Science\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Isidore of Seville: How {\i not} to write etymologies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Isidore of Seville was a bishop living in seventh-century Spain; his book {\i Etymologies} ({\i Origines}) was a very popular reference work in the Middle Ages.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Trans. by Dirckx (2007)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Frenesis is so called either because it is a disorder of the mind (G. {\i phrenes}) or because its victims grind their teeth (L. {\i frendere} \u8216'to gnash the teeth\u8217'). This is a form of mental disturbance with violent behavior and dementia, a choleric affliction.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Hydrophobia is literally \u8216'fear of water\u8217' (Gr. {\i hydor} \u8216'water\u8217', {\i phobos} \u8216'fear\u8217'); compare the Latin term {\i morbus lymphaticus}, from {\i lympha} \u8216'water\u8217'. This is caused by the bite of a mad dog, or even by coming into contact with its saliva spilled on the ground, which will provoke either man or beast to madness and rage.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Epilemsia amounts to an attack or assault (Gr. {\i epilepsia}) on both mind and body. It arises from a superabundance of black bile acting on the brain. It is also called the falling (Lat. {\i caduca}) sickness because during an attack the patient falls down. Lay persons call victims of this disorder {\i lunatici} because they imagine that the demons follow the phases of the moon in playing their tricks, and also {\i larvatici}. Still other names are the great, divine, or comitial disease. Great it certainly is, in that it can make a healthy man fall down and foam at the mouth. It is called comitialis because, in pagan times, if someone had such an attack on a day set aside for a public assembly [Lat. {\i comitium}], the assembly was postponed. Among the Romans such a day was set aside each year in January.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Vertigo means a whirlwind that stirs up earth and throws it around. In the vertex of the human body, arteries and veins can likewise stir up a wind from undue moisture and relaxation, and cause the eyes to spin, and that too we call vertigo.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Cancer, Latin for \u8216'crab\u8217', is named for its similarity to the sea creature. According to the physicians, no medicine can cure such a lesion. Although the part in which it arises is often excised so as to prolong the patient\u8217's life, death nonetheless eventually ensues.\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Manuscripts of the {\i Etymologies}:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/zos/pa0032"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
Zofingen, Stadtbibliothek, Pa 32
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/csg/0236"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
St.\u160?Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek, Cod. Sang. 236
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/csg/0231"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
St.\u160?Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek, Cod. Sang. 231
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.e-codices.unifr.ch/en/list/one/csg/0879"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
St.\u160?Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek, Cod. Sang. 879
}}}
\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Translation of the full work:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Barney, Stephen A., W.J. Lewis, J.A. Beach, and Oliver Berghof, trans. 2006. {\i The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville.} Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Scholastic Humanism and the Creation of the University\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Due to licensing restrictions, the images used for this section of the lecture cannot be posted online.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part I\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ACIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'grapes in a cluster\u8217' ({\i acinus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ACIN-ar, pertaining to an acinus, a small seed or kernel, as of a grape; inter-ACIN-ar, among alveoli of a racemose gland; ACIN-iform, grape- or berry- shaped (applies to a type of silk gland in a spider)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 AL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'wing\u8217', ({\i ala})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ALA, any winglike projection or structure; ex-AL-ate, not having winglike appendages, apterous; ALI-FER-ous, having wings; ALI-NOT-um, the dorsal plate of an insect to which wings are attached\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ANNUL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'ring\u8217' ({\i annulus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ANNULUS, any ringlike structure; ANNUL-ose, possessing rings\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 APIC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'tip\u8217', \u8216'summit\u8217', \u8216'apex\u8217' ({\i apex})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab sub-APIC-al, nearly at the apex; peri-APIC-al, around an apex; APIC-ul-ate, forming abruptly to a small tip, as a leaf\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ARGENT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'silver\u8217' ({\i argentum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ARGENT-eous, like silver; ARGENTI-FER-ous, producing or containing silver; ARGENT-in-idae, family of small, silvery marine fishes\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CAN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'dog\u8217' ({\i canis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CAN-in-idae, family which includes dogs, wolves and jackals; CAN-in-iform, having the form of a typical canine tooth\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CAPIT- (-CIPIT-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'head\u8217' ({\i caput})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CAPIT-al; BI-CEPS; CAPIT-ulum or CAPIT-ellum, knoblike swelling on the end of bone; CAPIT-ell-idae, family of worms with small heads\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 DUR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hard\u8217', \u8216'dura mater\u8217' ({\i durus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab en-DURE; ob-DUR-ate; in-DUR-at-ion, the hardening of a tissue or part; epi-DUR-al, space between the dura mater and the wall of the vertebral canal; DUR-amen, hard darker central region of a tree stem, heart-wood\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 EQU-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'horse\u8217' ({\i equus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab EQU-estrian; EQU-it-at-ion; EQU-it-ant, overlapping saddle-wise, as leaves in a leaf-bud; EQU-idae, family of mammals having a single extant genus, Equus, which includes the horse, ass and zebra\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LACRIM- (LACHRYM-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'tear\u8217' ({\i lacrima})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LACRIM-al, pertaining to tears or to tear-secreting organs, the lacrimal bone; NASO-LACRIM-al, pertaining to the nose and lacrimal apparatus\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LACUN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'small pit\u8217', \u8216'gap\u8217' ({\i lacuna})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LACUNA, a space between cells; a sinus; a cavity in bone; a small cavity or depression on the surface of lichens; a leaf gap; LACUN-oso-RUG-ose, having deep furrows or pits, as some seeds and fruits\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LIMIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'threshold\u8217' ({\i limen})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab e-LIMIN-ate; LIMEN, threshold, minimum stimulus or quantitative difference in stimulus that is perceptible, or boundary; LIMEN NASI, boundary between the osseous and cartilaginous portions of the nasal cavity; LIMIN-al, pertaining to a threshold, applies to stimulus, sensations\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MAL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'cheek\u8217', \u8216'cheekbone\u8217' ({\i mala})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MAL-ar, pertaining to the cheek or to the zygoma\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 OCUL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'eye\u8217' ({\i oculus}); OCELL-, \u8216'little eye\u8217' ({\i ocellus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MON-OC-le; OCELL-ate, like an eye or eyes, applies to marking in many animals; TRANS-OCUL-ar, extending across the eye; MON-OCULE, a one-eyed animal\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PALAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'palate\u8217', \u8216'roof of the mouth\u8217' ({\i palatum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PALAT-ine, pertaining to or in the region of the palate (said of artery, bone, foramen); PALAT-itis, inflammation of the palate; PALAT-iform, resembling the palate\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PARIET-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'wall\u8217' ({\i paries})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PARIES, wall of a hollow structure; PARIET-al, pertaining to or forming part of the wall of a structure (of cells, membrane, etc.), also the parietal bone in the roof of the skull; UTERO-PARIET-al, pertaining to the uterus and abdominal wall\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PLANT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'sole of the foot\u8217', \u8216'sprout\u8217' ({\i planta})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PLANTA-, the sole of the foot, or the first tarsal joint of insects; PLANTI-GRADE, walking on the full sole of the foot; im-PLANT; trans-PLANT-at-ion\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PONT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bridge\u8217' ({\i pons})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PONT-oon; PONTI-FF; PONS, a process or bridge of tissue connection two parts of an organ, or a convex white eminence situated at the base of the brain; CEREBRO-PONT-ine, relating to cerebrum and pons; PONTO-BULB-ar, pertaining to the pons and the medulla oblongata\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PULVIN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'cushion\u8217' ({\i pulvinus}); PULVIL-, \u8216'little cushion\u8217' ({\i pulvillus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PULVINUS, a cellular swelling at the junction of axis and leaf stalk; PULVILLUS or PULVIN-ulus, pad, process or membrane on the foot or between the claws, the lobe between each claw\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SEN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'old\u8217' ({\i senex})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SEN-ior; SEN-ate; pre-SEN-il-ity, premature old age; SEN-OP-ia, the change of vision in the aged in which persons formerly myopic acquire what seems to be normal vision because of presbyopia\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part II\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 AQU(A)-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'water\u8217' ({\i aqua})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab AQUA-tic, AQUE-DUCT; AQUI-FER, a water-bearing bed or stratum of permeable rock, sand or gravel; AQUA REGIA, a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids which dissolves gold\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BREV-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'short\u8217' ({\i brevis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BREV-ity; ab-BREVI-ate; BREVI-PED, having short legs; BREVI-FOLI-ate, having short leaves; BREVI-LINGU-al, with a short tongue\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CAPILL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'hair\u8217' ({\i capillus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CAPELL-ini; CAPILL-ary; CAPILL-ar-ec-TAS-ia, dilatation of the capillaries; CAPILL-aceous, having hairlike filaments\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 COLL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'neck\u8217' ({\i collum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab COLL-ar bone, the clavicle; TORTI-COLL-ar, affected with wry-neck or TORTI-COLL-is\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CORON-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'crown\u8217' ({\i corona}); COROLL-, \u8216'little crown\u8217' ({\i corolla})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab COROLLA, the petals of a flower; COROLL-aceous, pertaining to a corolla; CORON-illa, genus of flowers named for crown-shaped flowers\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CORTIC-, CORT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bark\u8217', \u8216'outer layer\u8217' ({\i cortex})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CORTEX, outer or more superficial part of an organ, the cerebral cortex; infra-CORTIC-al, beneath the cortex; CORTICI-PET-al, conducting toward the cortex\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CRUC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'cross\u8217' ({\i crux})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CRUCI-FY; ex-CRUCI-at-ing; CRUCI-FER, a plant with four petals and tetradynamous stamens, a member of the family Cruciferae; CRUCI-ate, cross-shaped\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CUNE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'wedge\u8217' ({\i cuneus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CUNE-iform; CUNE-ate, wedge-shaped; prae-CUNE-us, the medial surface of the parietal or the quadrate lobe of the cerebrum\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ENS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'sword\u8217' ({\i ensis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ENS-iform, sword-shaped, as the ensiform cartilage\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FALC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'sickle\u8217' ({\i falx})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FALX, sickle-shaped fold of dura mater; FALC-ate, sickle-shaped, hooked\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FUG-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to flee\u8217', \u8216'to put to flight\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab re-FUGE; FUGI-tive; NIDI-FUG-ous, leaving the nest soon after hatching; CEREBRI-FUG-al, applies to nerve fibres which pass from the brain to the spinal cord; LACTI-FUGE, a drug or agent that lessens the secretion of milk\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LINE-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'line\u8217' ({\i linea})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LINE-ar; de-LINE-ate; LINE-at-ion, an arrangement of lines; LINE-ol-ate, marked by fine lines or striae\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 LUC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'light\u8217', \u8216'to shine\u8217' ({\i lux})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab LUC-id; e-LUC-id-ate; NOCTI-LUC-ent, phosphorescent, luminescent; LUCI-FUG-al, fleeing from or avoiding light\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MATR-, MATERN-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'mother\u8217' ({\i mater, maternus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MATRO-CLIN-ous, derived from or inherited from the maternal line; MATR-ix, something within which something else originates or takes form or develops\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MONT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'mountain\u8217' ({\i mons})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MONTI-COL-ous, inhabiting mountainous regions; MONT-iculus, largest part of the superior vermis of the cerebellum; MONT-icules, small eminences or prominences\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 MULT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'many\u8217' ({\i multus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab MULTI-CARIN-ate, having many carinae or ridges; MULTI-COST-ate, with many ribs, ridges or veins; MULTI-OCUL-ur, many-eyed\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 RET-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'net\u8217', \u8216'network\u8217' ({\i rete})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab RETE, a network or net; RET-ina, the light-receptive layer and terminal expansion of the optic nerve in the eye; RET-icle or RET-iculum, a delicate network of cell protoplasm\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 ROSTR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'beak\u8217' ({\i rostrum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ROSTRUM, beak or beaklike process; LONGI-ROSTR-al, with a long beak; ROST-ell-iform, shaped like a small beak\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 TORQU-, TORT-, TORS-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to twist\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab TORT; re-TORT; TORT-ure; dis-TORS-ion, the act of twisting; LATERO-TORS-ion, a twisting to one side; con-TORTU-PLIC-ate, applies to a bud with contorted and plicate leaves\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 VERM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'worm\u8217' ({\i vermis})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab VERMI-celli; VERM-icul-at-ion, wormlike or peristaltic movement, or fine, wavy markings; VERMI-LINGU-al, having a worm-shaped tongue; VERMI-PAR-ous, producing wormlike young, as do blowflies\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Roots, Part III\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 BULL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'bubble\u8217', \u8216'blister\u8217' ({\i bulla}); BULLI-, \u8216'to boil\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab BULLA, a large bleb or blister forming either within or beneath the epidermis and filled with lymph; VESI-oluo-BULL-ous, characterized by both vesicles and bullae at the same time\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 COL-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to inhabit\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FUNGI-COL-ous, living in or on fungi; LATEBRI-COL-ous, inhabiting holes; DESERTI-COL-ous, desert-inhabiting; RADICI-COL-ous, with the flower seated immediately upon the crown of a root, or dwelling in the root, as a parasite\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CORI-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'skin\u8217' ({\i corium})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CORIUM, the deep layer of the skin; CORI-aceous, leathery (applies to leaves); CORI-aria, a genus of poisonous shrubs used in dyeing and tanning\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 CRIST-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'crest\u8217' ({\i crista})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab CRISTA, a crest; CRISTA TERMIN-alis, crest on the wall of the right atrium; inter-CRIST-al, between the surmounting ridges of a bone, organ or process (used particularly in intercristal diameter of pelvis, the distance between two clear crests)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FAEC- (FEC-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'excrement\u8217', \u8216'sediment\u8217' ({\i faeces})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FAECA-LITH, concretion or calcified mass of faecal material (= COPRO-LITH); FAEC-al-oid, resembling faeces; FAEC-ula, the faecal pellet of an insect\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FLA-, FLAT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to blow\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ex-suf-FLAT-ion, forced discharge of breath; FLAT-ul-ence, having gas in the stomach and intestinal tract\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FLOR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'flower\u8217' ({\i flos})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FLOR-ist; FLOR-id; ef-FLOR-esc-ence, eruption of exanthemous disease; extra-FLOR-al, situated outside the flower; pre-FLOR-at-ion, the form and arrangement of flowers in the bud\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 FORNIC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'arch\u8217' ({\i fornix})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab FORNIX, an arched body or surface, such as the fornix cerebri; FORNIC-al, like or pertaining to a fornix\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GER-, GEST-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'to carry\u8217', \u8216'to bear\u8217'\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab di-GEST, to convert food in assimilable form; in-GEST, to take substances into the body; OVI-GER, a leg modified for carrying the eggs in some pycnogonids (sea spiders)\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 GUTT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'drop\u8217' ({\i gutta})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GUTT-er; GUTT-ate, having drop-like markings; GUTT-at-ion formation of drops of water on plants; GUTT-iform, drop-shaped; GUTT-ul-ate, in the form of a small drop, as markings\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NAEV- (NEV-)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'birthmark\u8217', \u8216'mole\u8217' ({\i naevus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NAEVUS, birthmark; NAEV-al, of or related to a naevus; NAEVO-XANTHO-endo-THELI-oma, a group or group of yellowish brown nodules sometimes found on extremities in early childhood\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NID-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'nest\u8217' ({\i nidus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab NID-at-ion, the renewal of uterine lining between menstrual periods; de-NID-at-ion, disintegration and ejection of superficial part of uterine mucus; NID-ament-al, applies to glands which secrete material for an egg-covering\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 PULVER-, PULV-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'dust\u8217' ({\i pulvus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab PULVER-ize; PULVI-PLUME, a powder-down feather; PULVER-aceous, covered with a layer of powdery granules\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 RADIC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'root\u8217' ({\i radix})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab RADIC-al; e-RADIC-ate; RADIC-ul-ose, having many rootlets; MONO-RADIC-ul-ar, having only one root; MYELO-RADIC-ul-itis, inflammation of spinal cord and roots of spinal nerves\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 RAM-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'branch\u8217' ({\i ramus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab RAMI-fic-at-ion; RAM-ate,branched; BI-RAM-ose, divided into two branches; RAMI-FLOR-ous, having flowers on branches\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SAX-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'rock\u8217' ({\i saxum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SAXI-CAV-ous, applies to rock-borers (as some molluscs), lithophagous; SAXI-FRAGE, plant of the family Saxifraga, perennial herbs frequently found growing in rock crevices; SAXI-COL-ous, inhabiting or growing around rocks\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SCUT-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'shield\u8217' ({\i scutum})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab ESCUT-cheon; SCUTE, an external scale, as of reptiles, fish or scaly insects; SCUT-ate protected by large scales or horny plates\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SERR-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'saw\u8217', \u8216'saw-tooth\u8217' ({\i serra})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SIERRA; SERR-at-iform, like a saw; sub-SERR-ate, somewhat notched or saw-toothed; SERRI-CORN-ia, a genus of beetles with saw-toothed antennae\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 STERCOR-, STERC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'excrement\u8217' ({\i stercus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab STERCO-BIL-in, the brown pigment of faeces; STERC-oma, a fecalith, a hard faecal mass, usually in the rectum; STERC-ul-ia, a type of plant with a fetid odour\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 SULC-\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab \u8216'furrow\u8217', \u8216'groove\u8217' ({\i sulcus})\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li1080 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab SULC-ate, furrowed, grooved; BI-SULC-ate, having two grooves; SULCO-MARGIN-al, situated at the margin of the spinal cord adjacent to the ventral median fissure\sa180\par}
}
